doc_src/development.rst, before:

Development Basics
================================================

Submitting patches
-----------------------------------------

The source code for SnapPy and its various parts are `hosted on
bitbucket <https://bitbucket.org/t3m>`_ as `Mercurial repositories
<https://www.mercurial-scm.org/>`_.   To contribute a patch, create a
free bitbucket account, fork the appropriate repository, and then send
us a pull request, as described in `this tutorial <https://confluence.atlassian.com/bitbucket/create-a-pull-request-774243413.html>`_.


OS X
---------------------------

Here is how to get a clean development setup under OS X.

- Install the latest Python 2.7 from Python.org using the `Mac
  Installer Disk Image <http://www.python.org/download/>`_; for these
  instructions to work, you need at least version
  2.7.15. (Alternatively, if you prefer Python 3, you can use 3.7.2 or
  newer.)  There are currently two versions, one for 10.6 and up
  (64-bit/32-bit) and one for 10.9 and up (64-bit); you want the
  second one.  Set your path so that "python" is::
      
    /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/2.7/bin/python

- Use `pip <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/index.html>`_ to install the
  following packages::

    python -m pip install --upgrade setuptools virtualenv wheel pip
    python -m pip install cython        # Used for Python-C interfacing
    python -m pip install sphinx        # For building the documentation
    python -m pip install ipython       # Improved Python shell
    python -m pip install py2app        # For making app bundles
    python -m pip install mercurial     # Source code control software
    python -m pip install "pyx<=0.12.1" # Just "pyx" if using Python 3

- Get the source code from the repository.  The program "hg" was
  installed in the last step and lives in the same directory as Python 2.7::

    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/plink
    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/spherogram
    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/snappy

- Test the stand-alone link editor::

    cd plink
    python setup.py pip_install
    python -m plink.app   # Link editor appears!

  This last command runs the script "plink/app.py"; the real code for
  the link editor is in "plink/__init__.py".

- Build and install Spherogram::

    cd ../spherogram
    python setup.py pip_install
    python setup.py test

- Now build SnapPy itself.  One builds it twice to generate the
  documentation, much of which is extracted from the installed module::

    cd ../snappy
    python setup.py pip_install
    python setup.py test   # Run the tests; pretty picture should appear.
    python setup.py build_docs pip_install
    python -m snappy.app   #SnapPy starts!

  To build the clickable app, just do the following::

    cd mac_osx_app
    # Edit "release.py" and comment out the last line (or second to
    # last line if using Python 3).
    python release.py

  though for general development purposes `python -m snappy.app` is
  usually the way to go.
    
Some major parts of the SnapPy codebase are:

- "SnapPy.pyx", "SnapPycore.pxi", "SnapPy.pxi": The Cython interface
  to the SnapPea kernel
- "opengl/CyOpenGL*.pyx": The Cython interface to OpenGL*
- "snappy/app.py": The core GUI code
- "snappy/polyviewer.py": The GUI code for Dirichlet domains
- "snappy/horoviewer.py": The GUI code for horoball pictures
- "snappy/database.py": Interacts with the sqlite3 manifold database

In addition, Jeff's old prototype for a Tk-based UI can be found in
"misc/JeffsOldUI/SnapPeaGUI.py"; just run Python on this file to try it
out, after installing `PythonMegaWidgets <http://pmw.sf.net>`_.


Windows
-------

These instructions have been tested on Windows 10, and describe
setting up a development environment using the (free) MSVC
compiler. To build the CyPari subcomponent, which few will want or
need to do, one must install additional tools.

- Install `Python 2.7 <https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/>`_,
  specifically the 32 bit version (Windows x86 not Windows x86-64).
  Tested with version 2.7.13.

- Install `Python-specific free version of Microsoft Visual C++
  <http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=44266>`_.
  If you would like to make your own installer you will also need
  `Inno Setup <http://www.jrsoftware.org/isdl.php>`_, specifically the
  unicode version; tested with version 5.5.9.

- Install whichever version of `MSYS2 <http://msys2.github.io>`_ is
  appropriate for your version Windows.  Most commonly, you will have
  a 64-bit Windows and hence want the "x86_64" installer; for
  concreteness the rest of these instructions assume this. (Technical
  note: even if you want to build 32-bit binaries, if your Windows is
  64-bit you want the x86_64 installer.) Follow the instructions on
  the webpage to update everything to the very latest MSYS2
  (``pacman -Sy pacman; pacman -Syu; pacman -Su`` etc.).

- Make a shortcut to ``c:\msys64\msys2.exe`` as you will be using it all
  the time; alternatively, pin ``mys2.exe`` to your taskbar.  

- Install some additional packages::

    pacman -S git make nano openssh perl tar unzip wget winpty patch

- Install your favorite text editor, for example you can install Emacs
  via::

    pacman -S  mingw-w64-x86_64-emacs

- Make it so that MinGW, Python, and Inno Setup are all in your PATH,
  as well as work around some stupid bug, by making the end of your
  "~/.bash_profile" file to read::

    PATH=/c/Python27:/c/Python27/Scripts:$PATH
    PATH=$PATH:'/c/Program Files (x86)/Inno Setup 5'
    export PATH
    alias emacs="/mingw64/bin/emacs"
    winpty bash; exit

  For example, do::

    nano ~/.bash_profile

- Python 2.7.9 and newer include `pip
  <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/index.html>`_ so let's use it
  to install the needed packages.::
  
    pip install --upgrade pip setuptools     # Upgrades pip to the current version.
    pip install pyreadline sphinx cython cypari
    pip install pyx==0.12.1
    pip install mercurial   # Installs "hg", used in next step

- Fetch the latest development versions of the source straight from
  the t3m repository::

    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/plink
    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/Spherogram
    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/SnapPy

- Build the components, from easiest to hardest, and then test::

    cd plink
    python setup.py install
    cd ../Spherogram
    python setup.py install
    cd ../SnapPy
    python setup.py install
    cd ..
    python -m SnapPy.test

- To run the app, you can just do::

    python -m snappy.app

- To build the binary installer, you need PyInstaller, but `because of
  this bug <https://github.com/pyinstaller/pyinstaller/issues/2343>`_,
  as of 2017/2/21 you need this `special version
  <https://bitbucket.org/nathan_dunfield/pyinstaller_windows/downloads/>`_::
  
    pip install PyInstaller-3.3.dev0+g483c819d.mod-py2-none-any.whl

  To build the binary installer do::

    cd windows_exe
    python make.py

  You will need to close the SnapPy window that pops up here to
  complete the build process. 

- Useful tips for those coming from Unix.  In MSYS2, your home
  directory is really something like::

    c:\msys2\home\Nathan Dunfield

  whereas your Windows 10 home directory is::

    c:\Users\Nathan Dunfield

  It is handy to have symbolic links from your MSYS2 home directory to
  the Downloads and Desktop folders on the Windows side.  See::
  
    http://www.howtogeek.com/howto/16226/

  for a discussion, but basically you start a "Command Prompt" as
  Adminstrator and do::

    cd "C:\msys64\home\Nathan Dunfield"
    mklink /D Desktop "C:\Users\Nathan Dunfield\Desktop"
    mklink /D Downloads "C:\Users\Nathan Dunfield\Downloads"


- To build CyPari, first install the 32-bit gcc compiler::

    pacman -S mingw-w64-i686-gcc

   Then open a *MinGW32 terminal window*, which is **different** than a
   MSYS2 terminal, and can be started via `c:\msys64\mingw32.exe`.
   This will put the 32-bit gcc in your path and set the correct
   "uname".  Now do::

     hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/CyPari
     cd CyPari
     sh build_pari.sh
     python setup.py build --compiler=mingw32
     python setup.py install
     python -m cypari.test   # About 30 tests will fail.

   Warning: CyPari will not build if there are spaces in the path to
   the CyPari directory.

Commit message:

macos_app: added manual mode to release.py

doc_src/development.rst, after:

Development Basics
================================================

Submitting patches
-----------------------------------------

The source code for SnapPy and its various parts are `hosted on
bitbucket <https://bitbucket.org/t3m>`_ as `Mercurial repositories
<https://www.mercurial-scm.org/>`_.   To contribute a patch, create a
free bitbucket account, fork the appropriate repository, and then send
us a pull request, as described in `this tutorial <https://confluence.atlassian.com/bitbucket/create-a-pull-request-774243413.html>`_.


OS X
---------------------------

Here is how to get a clean development setup under OS X.

- Install the latest Python 2.7 from Python.org using the `Mac
  Installer Disk Image <http://www.python.org/download/>`_; for these
  instructions to work, you need at least version
  2.7.15. (Alternatively, if you prefer Python 3, you can use 3.7.2 or
  newer.)  There are currently two versions, one for 10.6 and up
  (64-bit/32-bit) and one for 10.9 and up (64-bit); you want the
  second one.  Set your path so that "python" is::
      
    /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/2.7/bin/python

- Use `pip <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/index.html>`_ to install the
  following packages::

    python -m pip install --upgrade setuptools virtualenv wheel pip
    python -m pip install cython        # Used for Python-C interfacing
    python -m pip install sphinx        # For building the documentation
    python -m pip install ipython       # Improved Python shell
    python -m pip install py2app        # For making app bundles
    python -m pip install "pyx<=0.12.1" # Just "pyx" if using Python 3

- Get the source code from the repository, using Mercurial. For
  example you can install Mercurial via::

    python -m pip install mercurial

  which will install the command "hg" in the same directory as Python 2.7.
  (Note: Mercurial does not yet support Python 3, so if going
  that route you will need to install "hg" some other way.) Now do::

    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/plink
    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/spherogram
    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/snappy

- Test the stand-alone link editor::

    cd plink
    python setup.py pip_install
    python -m plink.app   # Link editor appears!

  This last command runs the script "plink/app.py"; the real code for
  the link editor is in "plink/__init__.py".

- Build and install Spherogram::

    cd ../spherogram
    python setup.py pip_install
    python setup.py test

- Now build SnapPy itself.  One builds it twice to generate the
  documentation, much of which is extracted from the installed module::

    cd ../snappy
    python setup.py pip_install
    python setup.py test   # Run the tests; pretty picture should appear.
    python setup.py build_docs pip_install
    python -m snappy.app   #SnapPy starts!

  To build the clickable app, just do the following::

    cd mac_osx_app
    python release.py --manual

  though for general development purposes `python -m snappy.app` is
  usually the way to go.
    
Some major parts of the SnapPy codebase are:

- "SnapPy.pyx", "SnapPycore.pxi", "SnapPy.pxi": The Cython interface
  to the SnapPea kernel
- "opengl/CyOpenGL*.pyx": The Cython interface to OpenGL*
- "snappy/app.py": The core GUI code
- "snappy/polyviewer.py": The GUI code for Dirichlet domains
- "snappy/horoviewer.py": The GUI code for horoball pictures
- "snappy/database.py": Interacts with the sqlite3 manifold database

In addition, Jeff's old prototype for a Tk-based UI can be found in
"misc/JeffsOldUI/SnapPeaGUI.py"; just run Python on this file to try it
out, after installing `PythonMegaWidgets <http://pmw.sf.net>`_.


Windows
-------

These instructions have been tested on Windows 10, and describe
setting up a development environment using the (free) MSVC
compiler. To build the CyPari subcomponent, which few will want or
need to do, one must install additional tools.

- Install `Python 2.7 <https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/>`_,
  specifically the 32 bit version (Windows x86 not Windows x86-64).
  Tested with version 2.7.13.

- Install `Python-specific free version of Microsoft Visual C++
  <http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=44266>`_.
  If you would like to make your own installer you will also need
  `Inno Setup <http://www.jrsoftware.org/isdl.php>`_, specifically the
  unicode version; tested with version 5.5.9.

- Install whichever version of `MSYS2 <http://msys2.github.io>`_ is
  appropriate for your version Windows.  Most commonly, you will have
  a 64-bit Windows and hence want the "x86_64" installer; for
  concreteness the rest of these instructions assume this. (Technical
  note: even if you want to build 32-bit binaries, if your Windows is
  64-bit you want the x86_64 installer.) Follow the instructions on
  the webpage to update everything to the very latest MSYS2
  (``pacman -Sy pacman; pacman -Syu; pacman -Su`` etc.).

- Make a shortcut to ``c:\msys64\msys2.exe`` as you will be using it all
  the time; alternatively, pin ``mys2.exe`` to your taskbar.  

- Install some additional packages::

    pacman -S git make nano openssh perl tar unzip wget winpty patch

- Install your favorite text editor, for example you can install Emacs
  via::

    pacman -S  mingw-w64-x86_64-emacs

- Make it so that MinGW, Python, and Inno Setup are all in your PATH,
  as well as work around some stupid bug, by making the end of your
  "~/.bash_profile" file to read::

    PATH=/c/Python27:/c/Python27/Scripts:$PATH
    PATH=$PATH:'/c/Program Files (x86)/Inno Setup 5'
    export PATH
    alias emacs="/mingw64/bin/emacs"
    winpty bash; exit

  For example, do::

    nano ~/.bash_profile

- Python 2.7.9 and newer include `pip
  <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/index.html>`_ so let's use it
  to install the needed packages.::
  
    pip install --upgrade pip setuptools     # Upgrades pip to the current version.
    pip install pyreadline sphinx cython cypari
    pip install pyx==0.12.1
    pip install mercurial   # Installs "hg", used in next step

- Fetch the latest development versions of the source straight from
  the t3m repository::

    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/plink
    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/Spherogram
    hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/SnapPy

- Build the components, from easiest to hardest, and then test::

    cd plink
    python setup.py install
    cd ../Spherogram
    python setup.py install
    cd ../SnapPy
    python setup.py install
    cd ..
    python -m SnapPy.test

- To run the app, you can just do::

    python -m snappy.app

- To build the binary installer, you need PyInstaller, but `because of
  this bug <https://github.com/pyinstaller/pyinstaller/issues/2343>`_,
  as of 2017/2/21 you need this `special version
  <https://bitbucket.org/nathan_dunfield/pyinstaller_windows/downloads/>`_::
  
    pip install PyInstaller-3.3.dev0+g483c819d.mod-py2-none-any.whl

  To build the binary installer do::

    cd windows_exe
    python make.py

  You will need to close the SnapPy window that pops up here to
  complete the build process. 

- Useful tips for those coming from Unix.  In MSYS2, your home
  directory is really something like::

    c:\msys2\home\Nathan Dunfield

  whereas your Windows 10 home directory is::

    c:\Users\Nathan Dunfield

  It is handy to have symbolic links from your MSYS2 home directory to
  the Downloads and Desktop folders on the Windows side.  See::
  
    http://www.howtogeek.com/howto/16226/

  for a discussion, but basically you start a "Command Prompt" as
  Adminstrator and do::

    cd "C:\msys64\home\Nathan Dunfield"
    mklink /D Desktop "C:\Users\Nathan Dunfield\Desktop"
    mklink /D Downloads "C:\Users\Nathan Dunfield\Downloads"


- To build CyPari, first install the 32-bit gcc compiler::

    pacman -S mingw-w64-i686-gcc

   Then open a *MinGW32 terminal window*, which is **different** than a
   MSYS2 terminal, and can be started via `c:\msys64\mingw32.exe`.
   This will put the 32-bit gcc in your path and set the correct
   "uname".  Now do::

     hg clone https://bitbucket.org/t3m/CyPari
     cd CyPari
     sh build_pari.sh
     python setup.py build --compiler=mingw32
     python setup.py install
     python -m cypari.test   # About 30 tests will fail.

   Warning: CyPari will not build if there are spaces in the path to
   the CyPari directory.
